+++
date = "2022-12-09"
title = "scientist vs politician"
categories = [ "posts", "late night thoughts"]
+++

{{< youtube Z3yyOL2cCLI>}}

cool conversation between a scientist and a politician.

like tyson, i’m not a big fan of having science getting involved in politics. also people take academia too seriously (they say “the data indicate this or imply that” without having the ability to spot bullshit in the first place), some try to lobby others into rooting for their “rights”

this is like a visionary arguing with a pragmatist. one clearly sees an issue while the other doesn’t.

i like that tyson introduces to shapiro new possibilities to think about the society and the world at large, and especially like that he avoids getting science politicized, but dislike the fact that he is a sometimes too ideal in his thinking such that he is not willing to be on the same page for some of the really pressing issues. on the other hand i think shapiro is too rigid in his thinking and wrapped up in his ulterior motivations or underlying assumptions, i.e. he thinks in binary terms that only way is true, although i understand he must think in this way otherwise he can’t debate with other politicians and change policies.

it’s the same when you apply this to the religious community (people reject religion but respect biblical teachings)- it’s like people could get fully charged about a specific issue from the bible but miss the wonderful truths contained in it, or the other way around that some people are too wrapped up and extreme about being scripturally correct but miss the practical aspects that these truths are meant to be delivered to people.

on objective truths - i’ve been thinking about this quite a lot lately. who am i and what do i care about? to be honest, in some way i am a truth-seeker. like tyson in the video, i care a lot about objective truths, too. truth is something unchanging no matter which angles you look at it, it could be anything in the universe, something that mankind has discovered though science and reason, or not discovered yet. and just because a truth hasn’t been revealed it doesn’t mean that it is not non-existent.

see the interesting thing is one can’t say that both are “not thinking hard enough” or “critically enough” about things because clearly they are. it’s just that they have different modes of thinking.