+++
date = "2022-10-20"
title = "actor-partner interdependence model"
categories = [ "posts", "learning notes", "explain to me like i'm five" ]
tags = [ "statistics", "data science" ]
+++

## what is an actor-partner interdependence model (APIM)?

- it’s a model that simultaneously estimates the effect of a person’s own variable (actor effect) and the effect of same variable but from the parter (partner effect) on an outcome variable.
- the actor and partner variables are the same variable from different persons
- all individuals are treated as actors and partners
- indistinguishable vs. distinguishable

## justification of using the APIM

- standard statistical tests assume the observations are independent i.e., uncorrelated - if we use methods with such assumptions on dyadic data, which consists inherent relationships and inter-dependency, this is fundamentally wrong. additionally, these tests neglect the variability that may arise due to time sequence/logitudinal, which is also an issue because then these statistical tests could lead to different conclusions. therefore we need to analyze the data using dyad as one unit.

- in LMM with fixed and random effect, we use the clustered mean as a predictor. but the APIM could include both the person's predictor values and the predictor values of their partner. the results of this would also be more interpretable.

- there is a hidden assumption of the HLM: observations within the same clustered are **positively** correlated. however, in dyadic data, this isn't always the case e.g., sometimes the correlation in the cluster could be negative i.e., compensatory dyads, or competitive dyads, scenarios involving social comparisons (if one member of a dyad has a higher score, the other member should have a lower score, etc).

- if you read kenny and kashy 2011 carefully, you notice that although they describe MLM methods, they are not actually using HLM methods as we have learned them. What they’re actually using are repeated measures methods.

## defining, measuring, and dealing with non-independence

so the reason why we use dyad as unit analysis is because the dependent variable of the two people tend to be correlated with each other. the issue is with the presence of interdependence i.e., my response would depend what I responded previously.

what if i don’t use a dyad as a unit of analysis? In my experiment, i have 33 dyads. but if I treat them independently as 64 individuals. the effect estimates are unbiased (fixed effects i.e., regression coefficients), but the standard errors are biased, i.e. sometimes too large, sometimes too small, sometimes hardly biased. also have a loss of degrees of freedom.

i don’t know exactly what the exactly the consequences of violating the non-independence assumption.

certainly could have a negative correlation. 

anyway the point is, if I have dyadic data, i’m going to analyze the data dyadic ally. By the way, analyses that focus on the individual as the unit of analysis lose much of what is important in the relationship (e.g., reciprocity or mutuality)